This tutorial is generated from a `Jupyter <http://jupyter.org/>`__
notebook that can be found
`here <https://github.com/elfi-dev/notebooks>`__.

Parallelization
===============

Behind the scenes, ELFI can automatically parallelize the computational
inference via different clients. Currently ELFI includes three clients:

-  ``elfi.clients.native`` (activated by default): does not parallelize
   but makes it easy to test and debug your code.
-  ``elfi.clients.multiprocessing``: basic local parallelization using
   Python’s built-in multiprocessing library
-  ``elfi.clients.ipyparallel``:
   `ipyparallel <http://ipyparallel.readthedocs.io/>`__ based client
   that can parallelize from multiple cores up to a distributed cluster.

A client is activated by giving the name of the client to
``elfi.set_client``.

This tutorial shows how to activate and use the ``multiprocessing`` or
``ipyparallel`` client with ELFI. The ``ipyparallel`` client supports
parallelization from local computer up to a cluster environment. For
local parallelization however, the ``multiprocessing`` client is simpler
to use. Let’s begin by importing ELFI and our example MA2 model from the
tutorial.

.. code:: ipython3

    import elfi
    from elfi.examples import ma2

Let’s get the model and plot it (requires graphviz)

.. code:: ipython3

    model = ma2.get_model()
    elfi.draw(model)




.. image:: https://raw.githubusercontent.com/elfi-dev/notebooks/dev/figures/parallelization_files/parallelization_5_0.svg



Multiprocessing client
----------------------

The multiprocessing client allows you to easily use the cores available
in your computer. You can activate it simply by

.. code:: ipython3

    elfi.set_client('multiprocessing')

Any inference instance created **after** you have set the new client
will automatically use it to perform the computations. Let’s try it with
our MA2 example model from the tutorial. When running the next command,
take a look at the system monitor of your operating system; it should
show that all of your cores are doing heavy computation simultaneously.

.. code:: ipython3

    rej = elfi.Rejection(model, 'd', batch_size=10000, seed=20170530)
    %time result = rej.sample(5000, n_sim=int(1e6))  # 1 million simulations


.. parsed-literal::

    CPU times: user 298 ms, sys: 25.7 ms, total: 324 ms
    Wall time: 3.93 s


And that is it. The result object is also just like in the basic case:

.. code:: ipython3

    # Print the summary
    result.summary()
    
    import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
    result.plot_pairs();
    plt.show()


.. parsed-literal::

    Method: Rejection
    Number of samples: 5000
    Number of simulations: 1000000
    Threshold: 0.0826
    Sample means: t1: 0.694, t2: 0.226



.. image:: https://raw.githubusercontent.com/elfi-dev/notebooks/dev/figures/parallelization_files/parallelization_11_1.png


Note that for reproducibility a reference to the activated client is
saved in the inference instance:

.. code:: ipython3

    rej.client




.. parsed-literal::

    <elfi.clients.multiprocessing.Client at 0x1a19c2f128>



If you want to change the client for an existing inference instance, you
have to do something like this:

.. code:: ipython3

    elfi.set_client('native')
    rej.client = elfi.get_client()
    rej.client




.. parsed-literal::

    <elfi.clients.native.Client at 0x1a1d2a5cf8>



By default the multiprocessing client will use all cores on your system.
This is not always desirable, as the operating system may prioritize
some other process, leaving ELFI queuing for the promised resources. You
can define some other number of processes like so:

.. code:: ipython3

    elfi.set_client(elfi.clients.multiprocessing.Client(num_processes=3))

**Note:** The ``multiprocessing`` library may require additional care
under Windows. If you receive a RuntimeError mentioning
``freeze_support``, please include a call to
``multiprocessing.freeze_support()``, see
`documentation <https://docs.python.org/3.6/library/multiprocessing.html#multiprocessing.freeze_support>`__.

Ipyparallel client
------------------

The ``ipyparallel`` client allows you to parallelize the computations to
cluster environments. To use the ``ipyparallel`` client, you first have
to create an ``ipyparallel`` cluster. Below is an example of how to
start a local cluster to the background using 4 CPU cores:

.. code:: ipython3

    !ipcluster start -n 4 --daemon
    
    # This is here just to ensure that ipcluster has enough time to start properly before continuing
    import time
    time.sleep(10)

.. note:: The exclamation mark above is a Jupyter syntax for executing shell commands. You can run the same command in your terminal without the exclamation mark.

.. tip:: Please see the ipyparallel documentation (https://ipyparallel.readthedocs.io/en/latest/intro.html#getting-started) for more information and details for setting up and using ipyparallel clusters in different environments.

Running parallel inference with ipyparallel
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

After the cluster has been set up, we can proceed as usual. ELFI will
take care of the parallelization from now on:

.. code:: ipython3

    # Let's start using the ipyparallel client
    elfi.set_client('ipyparallel')
    
    rej = elfi.Rejection(model, 'd', batch_size=10000, seed=20170530)
    %time result = rej.sample(5000, n_sim=int(5e6))  # 5 million simulations


.. parsed-literal::

    CPU times: user 3.47 s, sys: 288 ms, total: 3.76 s
    Wall time: 18.1 s


To summarize, the only thing that needed to be changed from the basic
scenario was creating the ``ipyparallel`` cluster and enabling the
``ipyparallel`` client.

Working interactively with ipyparallel
--------------------------------------

If you are using the ``ipyparallel`` client from an interactive
environment (e.g. jupyter notebook) there are some things to take care
of. All imports and definitions must be visible to all ``ipyparallel``
engines. You can ensure this by writing a script file that has all the
definitions in it. In a distributed setting, this file must be present
in all remote workers running an ``ipyparallel`` engine.

However, you may wish to experiment in an interactive session, using
e.g. a jupyter notebook. ``ipyparallel`` makes it possible to
interactively define functions for ELFI model and send them to workers.
This is especially useful if you work from a jupyter notebook. We will
show a few examples. More information can be found from ```ipyparallel``
documentation <http://ipyparallel.readthedocs.io/>`__.

In interactive sessions, you can change the model with built-in
functionality without problems:

.. code:: ipython3

    d2 = elfi.Distance('cityblock', model['S1'], model['S2'], p=1)
    
    rej2 = elfi.Rejection(d2, batch_size=10000)
    result2 = rej2.sample(1000, quantile=0.01)

But let’s say you want to use your very own distance function in a
jupyter notebook:

.. code:: ipython3

    def my_distance(x, y):
        # Note that interactively defined functions must use full module names, e.g. numpy instead of np
        return numpy.sum((x-y)**2, axis=1)
    
    d3 = elfi.Distance(my_distance, model['S1'], model['S2'])
    rej3 = elfi.Rejection(d3, batch_size=10000)

This function definition is not automatically visible for the
``ipyparallel`` engines if it is not defined in a physical file. The
engines run in different processes and will not see interactively
defined objects and functions. The below would therefore fail:

.. code:: ipython3

    # This will fail if you try it!
    # result3 = rej3.sample(1000, quantile=0.01)

Ipyparallel provides a way to manually ``push`` the new definition to
the scopes of the engines from interactive sessions. Because
``my_distance`` also uses ``numpy``, that must be imported in the
engines as well:

.. code:: ipython3

    # Get the ipyparallel client
    ipyclient = elfi.get_client().ipp_client
    
    # Import numpy in the engines (note that you cannot use "as" abbreviations, but must use plain imports)
    with ipyclient[:].sync_imports():
        import numpy
    
    # Then push my_distance to the engines
    ipyclient[:].push({'my_distance': my_distance});


.. parsed-literal::

    importing numpy on engine(s)


The above may look a bit cumbersome, but now this works:

.. code:: ipython3

    rej3.sample(1000, quantile=0.01)  # now this works




.. parsed-literal::

    Method: Rejection
    Number of samples: 1000
    Number of simulations: 100000
    Threshold: 0.0146
    Sample means: t1: 0.693, t2: 0.233



However, a simpler solution to cases like this may be to define your
functions in external scripts (see ``elfi.examples.ma2``) and have the
module files be available in the folder where you run your ipyparallel
engines.

Remember to stop the ipcluster when done
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. code:: ipython3

    !ipcluster stop


.. parsed-literal::

    2018-04-24 19:14:56.997 [IPClusterStop] Stopping cluster [pid=39639] with [signal=<Signals.SIGINT: 2>]


